In his work, first published in 1991, the philosophy and social historian Panajotis Kondylis demonstrates that the social and intellectual (geistlige) transformations of the last quarter of the nineteenth century until today form a structural unity.
The societal processes that have taken place over the course of about 150 years resulted in a Paradigm shift: instead of the bourgeois-liberal mode of thinking and living, the egalitarian-mass-democratic attitude of consumption, with its promises of prosperity, determines the world of the twentieth and twenty-first century.

The overcoming of the scarcity of goods leads to a historically unparalleled situation, to mass consumption, which keeps the postmodern system going.
The central thesis is: the economic success of the bourgeois value concepts of freedom and equality is at the same time the cause of their decline.
There are no aesthetic nor ethic reservations in widespread hedonism, the analysis of the political reality is replaced by universal communication driven by the hope for world peace.
In the age of pluralistic mass democracy, perspectives on global society open up in which, however, trade does not replace war, but in which distributional struggles grow. 

This book not only raises a historical and intellectual-historical claim but also a methodological one, in that it seeks to elucidate the interconnections between social, cultural and spatio-temporal perception.  

Content:
1: Basic concepts and figures of thought
2: Formation and structure of the bourgeois mode of thinking and living
2.1: The ideological framework
2.2: The life-form and culture
3: The replacement of the bourgeois synthetic-harmonising figure of thought by an analytical-combinatorial one in the field of intellectual production.
3.1: Literature and art
3.1.a: in general
3.1.b: individual fields
3.2: Philosophy and sciences (Wissenschaften)
4: The development of mass-democracy, the decline of the bourgeois mode of life and the further development of the analytical-combinatorial figure of thought.
4.1: Reinterpretation and transformation of liberalism
4.2: Structural characteristics of mass-democracy
4.3: mass-democratic mentality and mode of life
4.4: character and effects of the cultural revolution of the sixties and seventies
4.5 Basic properties of scientific and philosophical thinking in mass-democracy
5: Outlook

1: Basic concepts and figures of thought.

The concepts  of the modern and the postmodern have since the last two decades been at the center of an international debate, which started from literature-historical and aesthetic questions, to then pass over into the philosophical and raise more fundamental problems. 
Philosophers usually sense atmospheric changes and new questions with some delay, but as soon as they intervene in an already running debate, they raise with the dignity connected to their office, to classify the subject matter into their categories and retain the last word by appealing to their supposedly higher status; after all, their participation in an originally non-philosophical debate testifies to the symptomatic character of the latter - even then, or even especially then, if a main motive for this involvement is the all-too-human, yet in the age of mass media almost irresistible desire to remain active in the great business of the mind.
Now, from the perspective of the outside observer, the debates often say less about the matter in dispute than about the debaters themselves and that is not just about their sympathies and antipathies, but also about the underlying ideological and socio-political currents.
What is issued in the debate as a conscious understanding of a reality then turns out to be an un- or semi-conscious aspect of the reality in question of which the meaning can be deduced through a translation into another language. 
This translation can, or course, only succeed if the reality which comes into question is seen within a broader perspective and interpreted using a subtler conceptual instrumentarium, so that in the resulting Wirklichheitsbild also that includes and makes that comprehensible, what otherwise wants to be Wirklichkkeitsinterpretation. 

One would not be mistaken to claim, using Marxist terminology, that the debate about modernity and postmodernity has - inevitably - been ideological.
With that is not meant in the least that the undertaken description were characterized by statements which relate directly or indirectly to the way that their authors wish to participate in the described state of affairs;
however, this (ideal) participation does not take place by the mentioning of their own name, but by stating normative positions whose representation the respective person has taken over.
The normative positions in which the perceptions and desires of the respective subject about their own status and own role, i.e., ultimately one's own claims to power, understandably saturate the capture and representation of the situation itself.
Thus, modernity and postmodernity were juxtaposed as epochal terms. Each of which was associated with specific values and unvalues: what was a universal claim of reason to govern human actions and affairs for the defenders of modernity meant open and latent totalitarianism for the advocates of postmodernism; and what for the latter was a welcome statement of relativity of viewpoints as the basis of tolerance and humanity was, for the former suspected of nihilism and anarchy.
The dispute over whether or not modernity had come to and end or not, had to revolve around the question of vitality or the viability of the values (or unvalues) assigned to it.
The epochal conception of values thus constituted the flip side of the value-based conception of the epochs - and the schematisation and even the stylisation of the epochal in its valence served, as has been normal in the history of modern intellectual history since the first demarcation of the "dark ages" of the Middle Ages against Antiquity on the one hand and the Renaissance on the other hand, underpinned by the desire of normative theorists, to know themselves to be in accordance with the moving forces of history and consequently make an objective imperative out of their own claim to power. 

The reference to the historical process, however, only goes so far to satisfy the aforementioned desire, to the extent that it seems necessary; however, the historical, sociological and ideological or ideology-critical analysis never penetrate so deeply that one's own normative preferences could be relativised or even shaken by it.
The followers of modernity do not pursue in all consistency the historical roots and preconditions of the belief in reason and therefore do not ask themselves what the value of such a belief after the end of the bourgeois age could have;
they seem to cherish the conviction that reason in the specific modern-universalist (neuzeitlich-universalist) sense of the word could sooner or later attain the status of a quasi-anthropological constant and deliver a fixed, clearly interpretable instance for the settling of all conflicts,
and thus survive the downfall of those social strata whose historical rise and victory it had demonstrably accompanied as a slogan.
The difficulties increase when the defenders of the modernist concept of reason wants to behave as a "progressive" in the post-bourgeois sense and is not prepared to identify socially with the bourgeoisie and politically with the classical doctrine of liberalism, but on the contrary, tries to reframe liberalism in the mass-democratic sense.
Such a frail undertaking must constantly entail ambiguities, for example, what in the bourgeois-liberal context was called discussion or discourse is transformed into "communication" - a word, that within the mass-democratic culture not necessarily has to been understood in terms of an act of "reason", but with all kinds of exoticisms and mysticisms.
But also the heralds of postmodern values, who suspect reason of totalitarian universalism, do not quite want to realise that their supposedly playful-humane scepticism cannot form the basis for the regulation of human coexistence in general and as such, but rather portrays an ideologically sublimated projection of attitudes and mentalities, that are typical for the mass consuming and permissive mass-democracy - from apolitical Hedonism to resigned indifference and to intellectual foolishness. 
It is to be expected, that most "postmodernists", who want to present their position as socially desirable and as a humane ideal, neither recognise these connections until their last consequence nor would they be willing to, identify themselves with that society in toto, whose unhindered, albeit in many respects contradictory functioning generates, spreads and needs such views in the first pace.
The question is not, whether, in abstracto "anything goes" and whether the plurality of opinions and modes of actions has a beneficial impact for "the" society and for "the" people, but rather, under what concrete circumstances such belief thrives and to what style of thinking it corresponds. 
Because it only applies under certain circumstances - which, by the way, the "postmodernists" themselves tacitly admit insofar as they base their reflections on the conditions of western societies prevailing at the time, without worrying about times of crisis, historical upheaval and to think about serious cases.
This political simplicity, for all their other differences of opinion, is what they share the liberal or democratic advocates of modernity.
They see through the potential aggressiveness of the claims of reason;
but in their endeavour, to eradicate together with reason's claim to universality also aggressiveness, they cannot bring themselves to to see it, aggressiveness has preceded reason in human history, reason forms therefore not the source of aggressiveness, but just one of its possible weapons. 

The ideological character of the constructions of the moderns and the postmoderns becomes visible in the light of elementary intellectual-history constatations, the holistic and atomical consideration, "identity" and "difference", dreams of unity of reason and relativising scepticism from the start in the womb of modern (neuzeitlichen) rationalism have existed next to each other and are mutually dependent; 
precisely for this reason both construction can be projected almost arbitrarily back into the intellectual history of the past, which is also done when it seems expedient for reasons of legitimacy.
In view of their fictitiousness and arbitrariness, their proclamations concerning modernity and postmodernity must hence not be taken at face value.
They are rather the symptoms of certain developments than their diagnoses - and the intention of this work is precisely to outline the developments, of which they are symptoms.
The symptom of a development, however, contains in a rudimentary or distorted form an aspect or possibly also a decisive feature of the development in question itself.
In this respect it is advisable, to start from the symptoms of a development or resp. to start from the speeches about them, in order to remove their ideological make-up and to the real form (Gestalt) of the development and advance thus to the objective meaning of those speeches.
The fact, that the contemporary common epochal stylisations of modernity and postmodernity are not correct in social and intellectual history, does not mean that the associated feeling of an epochal upheaval as such is deceptive.
The question is, where this upheaval is to be placed, whereof it consists and what it has brought about. Periodisations with ideological-normative intent are not false because each periodisation must be wrong, but because they are conceived in such a way that they legitimise the claims to power of their authors in the sense explained above.
For their part proper periodisations must not be normative-contentual, but rather take formal-structural criteria as a basis;
not the content of thought, but figures of thought should be compared with each other and considered in their succession.
From this point of view, the inevitable normatively loaded concept of reason, for example, is not of central importance, while conversely forms of the ideal come to the foreground, which are overarching, i.e., which can be recognized in very different areas and branches of intellectual creation, but can also be recognised in the rest of social life.
In this way research is no longer oriented towards the self-understanding of the intellectuals, which is the inspirations of their epochal constructions, but it keeps a much broader spectrum in mind, in which the self-understanding of intellectuals as object, not as an organ of knowledge, is included.
The fruitfulness of this procedure is confirmed by the evidence between the central figure of thought, which encompasses in different variations all fields of the ideal, and the phenomena and tendencies determining economy and society make it an exact structural correspondence. 
Only the proof of such a correspondence makes a valid periodisation possible;
if this not sought and provided, then periodisations remain empty, at least to the extent that should capture the character of entire historical epochs and not merely the development in sub-areas.

Here we want to advocate and justify the view, the problem of modernity and postmodernity - both in its social and political as well as its cultural aspect - can be best illuminated against the background of the bourgeois mode of thinking and living and of the transition from liberalism to mass-democracy.
A double mistake, namely the failure to appreciate the specific bourgeois roots and features of the concept of reason and the lack of insight into the importance of the decline of the bourgeois mode of living and classical liberalism for the future of this same concept, led the advocates of modernity to the paradox of recommending bourgeois-liberal ideals and procedures, but without the bourgeoisie and (classical) liberalism as a panacea for the problems of mass democracy.
The reverse double error, namely the failure to appreciate the concrete mass-democratic origin and character of pluralism, as well as the lack of insight in the inseparable interconnection of "good" and "bad" aspects of the consuming and permissive mass society, in turn led the heralds of postmodernism to contradict themselves, in the name of relativising scepticism, of all things, to sing the most ahistorical laud of the (apparently "reasonable") values such as tolerance and humanity.
Only a consequent, i.e., devoid of normative prejudices and claims to power, classification of the problems of modernity and postmodernity in the larger socio-political and cultural context, which consist in the replacement of the bourgeois figure of thought by a new one and of (classical) liberalism by mass-democracy, can eliminate similar paradoxes and contradictions.
The same path would also offer the possibility to bring the literary-artistic and the historical-sociological components of the problem, whose organic interconnectedness in its entire scope and trajectory has hardly been explored, to a common interpretative denominator.
In order to achieve this, we must start with clarifying some basic concepts.

As is well known, the term "modernity" is employed in a double sense.
On the one hand, it denotes a particular phase or direction of the history of literature and art, which began in the second half of the 19th century and took in its multiplicity a firmer shape in the first three or four decades of the 20th century;
on the other hand, it means as much as "modern times" (neuzeit) or "Enlightenment", actually in their demarcation from the theological view of the world and humanity as well as in its claim to the autonomous shaping of human coexistence on the basis of an immanent foundation, but not by arbitrary criteria and values, which can be determined by reason. 
A corresponding double meaning had to be granted to the concept of "postmodernity".
Postmodern was initially used to describe the literary-artistic currents, that emerged at an earlier or later data after the Second World War and which harboured the ambition, or at least gave the impression that they were trying, of trying to leave behind the forms, contents and attitudes of literary-artistic modernism;
shortly afterwards, postmodernism was apostrophised as that epoch, that followed modernity in the sense of the modern age or the Enlightenment and grounded in the knowledge, that the project of modernity had failed and that in order to avoid the universalisms and totalitarianisms of reason, the best - finally viable today, indeed only open - pathway to pursue is the one of free play of intellectual forces and of many centres of power and opinion in a pluralist society.
These dual concepts of modernity and postmodernity developed, each with a different precision and emphasis, in two debates, one was conducted mainly by literary and art historians, the other and later one mainly by philosophers.
The two debates only partially crossed each other and remained asymmetrical.
For the former, which revolved mainly around literary-artistic and cultural manifestations, had little to do with the project of the modern age (Neuzeit) or take care of the Enlightenment and the concept of reason, and that was for the simple reason that both literary-artistic modernity and literary-artistic postmodernity (let us assume for the time being that the latter actually exists as an independent current) have presupposed the demise of that project or have even brought it about themselves.
From the background of this key commonality of modernity and post-modernity in the literary-artistic sense could often their connection or continuity be claimed and even the independence of the latter be disputed, no matter how this thesis was justified in each case.
But as soon as the talk about modernity and postmodernity turned to the epochal and philosophical, the opposition between both terms gained clearly and inevitably the upper hand.

The asymmetry between the two aforementioned debates and conceptual pairs has another revealing aspect, namely the chronological.
The literary-artistic modernism is only a century old, modernity as an epoch, that was marked by the postulates and desiderata of secular reason, goes back to the beginnings of the modern era;
if one is not prepared, to go back that far, then one must at least associate its beginnings with the beginnings of the Enlightenment.
The advocates of modernity in this latter sense now think that it would endure to the present day and still retain their normative validity (as a yet unfinished) project.
Paradoxically those, who speak of postmodernism in the epochal and philosophical sense, share also the opinion of the longevity of (enlightened) modernity, by claiming that only the developments of the last two or three decades have made this overcoming possible, even made it inevitable.
The philosophers of postmodernity agree with this dating of the great rupture with literary-artistic postmodernism, whereby the related opinion of the independence of the postmodern leads to a direct or an indirect misjudgement of the pivotal intellectual-historical function of literary-artistic modernity.
In this perspective the latter appears less as the workshop of a new figure of thought, that would be related to forward-looking social tendencies, and more as a revolt against traditional bourgeois culture, which expresses itself through the dissolution of its forms, but without being able to fundamentally overthrow its contents and values, since it remains linked to them as their negative counterpart.
Despite all the shifts in accents, emphases and sympathies, literary-artistic modernity is still seen from the view of the advocates of enlightened modernity: at worst, they are reactionary products of thought and at best they are differently motivated protests - in any case, not the crystallisation of a new and independent figure of thought that articulates the central tendencies of movement in society.

It is easy to see why literary-artistic modernity is judged in this way in the available cases: today's champions of an independent postmodernism would have to strongly relativise their epochal claim and appear in their own eyes more like epigones and demiurges, if they had traced their starting point back to its remote and partly concealed intellectual-historical roots; 
and the advocates of modern-enlightened modernity (neuzeitlich-aufklarerischen Moderne) would be on the losing side if they had realised that their fight against postmodernity is only a rearguard action of an army that now consists only of its rearguard, since its bulk has already been depleted from the time of the emergence of literary-artistic modernity - and not in the least because of it.
Against both positions, therefore, must one bring fourth the key intellectual-historical character of literary-artistic modernity as the creator of a new, independent and visionary figure of thought.
This cannot only go about working out the origin of literary-artistic postmodernism from literary artistic modernity in terms of content and style.
The unity and continuity of both of these directions has already been asserted repeatedly, even demonstrated, but the argumentation has remained within the framework of aesthetics and the history of literature and art.
In contrast, it is necessary to broaden the hermeneutic horizon through historical, sociological and world-view analysis, in order to show that the unified development, which includes literary-artistic modernity and literary-artistic postmodernity, begins at the same time as a profound social transformation and accompanies the major phases of the transformation to the present day. 
The discovery of this parallelism, which is actual an organic connection, becomes less banal when it becomes apparent that between there is an exact structural correspondence between the figure of thought which comes into question and the social entity which comes into question or that the figure of thought and mode of functioning of society in its different activities and areas can be reduced to the same formal structure without regards to the almost incomprehensible variety of content.
For its part the figure of thought extends itself not only to literary-artistic manifestations, but just as much to the fields of natural sciences, the humanities and philosophy.
For the forms of the ideal in their totality do indeed form, when considered in themselves, the counterpart of the material functioning of society, while they constitute at the simultaneously an aspect or a part of the same functionality.

Which social transformations and which phases of it are now to be considered, when it is a question of making the formation of literary-artistic modernity and its further development into literary-artistic postmodernity understandable against a comprehensive background.
A schematising answer can be as follows.
Literary-artistic modernity takes time at the moment that industrial mass society is formed and at the same time starts to push back the reign and social preconditions of liberalism.
Because liberalism in its concrete historical sense, i.e., in the sense of the social and political dominance of the bourgeoisie, lost in substance and assertiveness to the degree that the emergence of mass society, which sought to articulate itself politically through mass organisations and actions, made the closed political game of the bourgeois more and more difficult.
Objective facts as well as the resistance of the bourgeoisie prevented for, all things considered, a short while the opening of liberalism in the democratic direction;
mass society was in this first phase of its development not yet a mass democracy, whereby the lack of democracy was related to the fact that the process of massification and atomisation was still incomplete.
The resulting contradiction was just eliminated by the loosening and dissolution of the oligarchic features belonging to the essence of classical liberalism and by the diminution of the social role - itself in flux - of the bourgeoisie, but also by the ever-increasing participation of the broader masses in consumption and ever-increasing mass production;
mass production and mass consumption henceforth constituted the mutually inseparable sides of a single social entity, that realised itself in the first decades after the Second world war primarily in the Western industrialised countries.
An intellectual product of this second great phase in the history of industrial mass society is literary-artistic postmodernism and the theory of postmodernity as an epoch that follows after modern-enlightened (neuzeitlichaufklarische) modernity.
Viewed sociologically literary-artistic modernity and literary-artistic postmodernity belong in the same degree and sense together as the two major phases in the history of mass society: the first, which developed under the conditions of early mass society, then transitioned in the latter, as mass society was transformed into a mass producing and consuming mass democracy.
The generic sociological distinction substantiated itself in several stylistic, contentual and atmospheric differences between the modern and postmodern artistic-literary trends, which will be discussed later (Chapter IV, section 5).
Much more important, however, seems to be the aspect of continuity, namely with regard to the conceptual and terminological matters, with which we deal in this section.

The double observation of continuity between literary-artistic modernism and literary-artistic postmodernism, as well as the connection of this continuity with the development of mass society, excludes first of all that the epochal caesura may be set at the late point in time at which it is positioned in negative agreement by the advocates of enlightened modernity and those advocates of postmodernity in the philosophical and socio-political sense.
This, in turn, suggests the idea of looking for a terminological convention that takes into account the parlance which has become commonplace, that dispels the misunderstandings implied by that parlance by means of a specific modification. 
Of course, we have to clearly distinguish between modernity in the epochal-enlightened sense from the literary artistic as well as both corresponding terms of postmodernity.
But if we place the epochal caesura in the foreground and want to date it differently than it is usually done today, then the paradox arises that postmodernity as an epoch, which follows the epoch of enlightened modernity, also encompasses that what has been called modernity in the literary-artistic sense.
In other words, postmodernity in the epochal sense commences temporary parallel with literary-artistic modernity and not first with literary-artistic postmodernity, as is often assumed today.
However, the paradox is confined to the terminological, if it remains clear in the matter that the talk of postmodernity sometimes refers to the philosophical or socio-historical epoch and at other times to the literary-artistic level.
In any case, the terminological paradox must be accepted, unless the decisive turn from liberalism - as the politics and world view of bourgeois modernity - to mass society and democracy is lifted out of the rigorous concept of postmodernity.
Even though the theory of postmodernity could only be established in a mature phase of the post-bourgeois era, the analysis of literary-artistic modernity will demonstrate us in the meantime that the essential material for thinking about it, as well as the socio-political preconditions for it, have been in place long before.
This qualifies us to apply the concept of postmodernity, so to speak, with retroactive force and give it thereby its concrete socio-historical, i.e., anti-bourgeois and anti-liberal, or mass-democratic sense.

We have already said that the transition from liberal-enlightened modernity to mass-democratic postmodernity has brought a change in the socially predominant figure of thought.
The way in which this transition took place, has already been sufficiently explored, and we do not need to engage it in detail, although some aspects of it must be highlighted and reworked by us (Chapter IV, Sections 1 and 2);
it also lets itself be overcome theoretically without special difficulties, if one does not fall in the widespread error of confusing liberalism and democracy by not using the terms in their concrete historical sense, but apply them so as they are used as catchphrases in the current political debate.
Much less researched and understood has been the question, whereof the bourgeois figure of thought consists - and even less, which figure of thought replaced the bourgeois one.
In an attempt to outline the latter, literary-artistic modernity (and postmodernity), as well as many scientific and philosophical theories of our century, will have to be placed in a new light and context than before.
For it will turn out that all these intellectual products are grounded in a common style of thought and a common perception of the world, out of which a certain figure of thought produces itself which a regularity that cannot be accidental.
Hereinafter we will call this figure of thought analytical-combinatorial, to contrast it with the synthetic-harmonising one that characterised the bourgeois mindset.
Bourgeois thought was fundamentally concerned with constructing the world view out of a variety of different things and forces, which, although they (might) be, in isolation, by in contradiction with each other, form a harmonious and lawful unity in their entirety, within which these frictions or conflicts are cancelled in the sense of a sound overarching rational purpose.
The part exists within the whole and finds its destiny by contributing to the harmonious perfection of the whole, not by denial, but by the development of its own individuality.
In this respect are the things remembered of their function, their substance, however, is not lost thereby, even if it cannot or cannot fully be recognized;
and it is precisely the assumption of the substantiality of the things that allows their objective valuation and their proper classification in this or that level of the harmonious whole.
Essentially otherwise behaves the analytical-combinatorial figure of thought.
Here there are no substances and no fixed things, only ultimate constituents that are determined by consistent analysis, points or atoms, whose actual existence only consists in their function, i.e., in their ability to form into an ever new combination with other points or atoms.
Consequently there cannot be question of harmony that is based on more or less fixed relationships between the parts and the whole; 
there are only combinations, which are constantly replaced by new and in principle equal ones.
Everything can and may, in principle, be combined with everything, because everything is situated at the same level, and there is no ontological background that would ensure the precedence of certain combinations over others.

The two fundamental figures of thought are the condensed ideal shapes or rather sides of certain constitutive features, the material correlative of which is to be found in the constitution and operating principle (i.e., in the concrete arrangement or movement of the individuals and the groups within) of the corresponding social entities.
Thus, the synthetic-harmonising figure of thought hinges on a social entity, in which social differences are substantial and are perceived as such, but at the same time they do not solidify (as was the case, for example, in the hierarchy of the societas civilis), but they take shape within the framework of a competition, which for its part does nor should lead to a struggle of all against all, but to a dynamic equilibrium.
The analytical-combinatorial figure of thought, on the other hand, goes hand in hand with a condition of society in which social differences are no longer regarded as substantial, but rather social mobility knows no limits in principle and constantly permits new occupations of socially available roles;
the mass-like character of this society makes it possible, in the view of the participation of all the atoms that constitute the mass, on all levels of the social processes an infinite numbers of combinations, whose multiplicity and at the same time transience make all though of substance disappear and lets only functional points of view be applied. 
Now, not only those aspects of social reality that are more or less conspicuous in the perception of socially living individuals, are reflected in the social governing figures of thought, but also that what we call the perception of the world in its totality, i.e., in Kantian terms, the forms of perception and the categories of understanding. 
The adequate articulation, already, of the immediate social dimension of a comprehensive figure of thought requires the development of a specific perception of the world - beyond that, the struggle about the modalities of how the world is perceived, must be an essential aspect of the profound social-ideological structure.
From the interaction of these two necessities under the concrete circumstances of the turn from bourgeois liberalism to mass democracy it resulted that the primacy of the quantity "time" was succeeded by the primacy of the quantity "space" within the analytical-combinatorial one, while at the same time central categories such as causality were relativised or even thrown overboard.
How this came about and what forms the alteration of the perception of the world in the context of the replacement of one figure of thought by the other, will be looked at in detail by us.
The only remark to be made in advance is that in the discussion of this question we must not confuse the plane of the philosophical, artistic or scientific perception of the world with the plane of of everyday experience of the world.
The latter, too, is modified in the course of history, but the breaks that have occurred several times in the former, especially since early modern times, do not appear here.
In other words: any revolution of the world through philosophy, art or science does not necessarily entail an anthropological revolution, although it usually has certain long-tern effects on the way certain social groups perceive the words.
The reason for this discrepancy lies in the fact that revolutions in the perception of the world do not arise out of the matured need of the broad masses to see (objects in the) world through different eyes, but rather from the polemic of a rather small social minority against the prevailing world view.
The change of worldview does therefore represent rather a symbolic act that confirms the victory of that minority against the official representatives of the old worldview, rather than an overturning of the banalities of everyday experience, against the background against which the life of most people or the biggest part of most people's lives, plays.

Another remark of a methodological nature is in place here. 
In this study, which is concerned with the contrast between the synthetic-harmonising and analytical-combinatorial figure of thought as well between time and space-oriented perception of the world as guideline, we will focus primarily on the intellectual products and social realities, in which decisive structures and tendencies are most vividly condensed.
This procedure is not based on a scientifically suspect eclecticism, in which the premises are tautological to the results, but rather its necessity arises from the fact that the driving factor in intellectual history and in the society constitute at the beginning - and also for a more or less long time - by no means the broader side of the spectrum in question.
Rather, they can be compared to locomotives that gradually succeed in setting a mass in motion that itself remains largely inert.
Even after a new figure of thought or social structure has been established, it is possible that the phenomena rooted in the old will continue to be found in the majority quantitatively.
The decisive question in each case, however, is to whom the function of the locomotive is assigned, what forms the axis around which the at the time central dispute revolves.
For the enduring heterogeneity of the spectrum, which is partly due to the persistence of the old, and the rapid differentiation or even splitting of the new, gives constantly rise to new conflicts that weaken the locomotive's pull.
This must be set against a structuralist, intellectual-historical and sociological simplifications which suggest the impression that one figure of thought or one social formation has replaced another, as it were, by an abrupt magic stroke.
Only the multiplicity and constant polemical confrontation within one and the same intellectual-historical or social formation can explain differentiations and ruptures, that initiate the transition to other formations; also the forces that break up the existing formation or structure are usually divided and contradictory in themselves.
Thus even at the time of the dominance of the bourgeois figure of thought, there were powerful side and counter currents; and the replacement of this figure of thought was in turn brought about simultaneously by several currents that often and fiercely fought against each other.
However, this was neither coincidence nor a misunderstanding: for the emerging mass-society and democracy was itself a composite of heterogeneous or even contradictory structures, whose individual aspects or tendencies must articulate themselves ideally in their own manner.




